NARRATOR:
Iceland is a stable democracy
with a high standard
of living,
and, until recently,
extremely low unemployment
and government debt.
We had the complete
infrastructure
of a modern society.
Clean energy,
food production.
Fisheries with a quota system
to manage them.
Good healthcare, education,
you know, clean air.
Not much crime.
It's a good place
for families to live.
We had almost
end-of-history status.
NARRATOR:
But in 2000,
Iceland's government
began a broad policy
of deregulation
that would have
disastrous consequences,
first for the environment
and then for the economy.
They started by allowing
multinational corporations
like Alcoa to build giant
aluminum-smelting plants
and exploit Iceland's
geothermal
and hydroelectric
energy sources.
Many of the most beautiful
areas in the highlands
with the most spectacular
colors are geothermal.
3So nothing comes
without consequence.
NARRATOR:
At the same time,
the government privatized
Iceland's three largest banks.
The result was one
of the purest experiments
in financial deregulation
ever conducted.
[SPEAKING IN FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
[CROWDS SHOUTING
IN FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
We have had enough.
How could all of this happen?
Finance took over, um, and,
uh, more or less
wrecked the place.
NARRATOR:
In a five-year period,
these three tiny banks,
which had never operated
outside of Iceland,
borrowed 120 billion dollars,
10 times the size
of Iceland's economy.
The bankers showered money
on themselves,
each other and their friends.
ZOEGA:
There was a massive bubble.
Stock prices went up
by a factor of nine.
House prices
more than doubled.
NARRATOR:
Iceland's bubble gave rise
to people like
Jón Asgeir Jóhannesson.
He borrowed billions
to buy up high-end retail
businesses in London.
He also bought
a pinstriped private jet,
a 40-million-dollar yacht
and a Manhattan penthouse.
MAGNASON:
Newspapers always had
the headline:
This millionaire bought
this company
in the U.K.
or in Finland or in--
In France or wherever,
instead of saying:
"This millionaire took
a billion-dollar loan
to buy this company, and he
took it from your local bank."
ZOEGA:
The banks set up
money market funds,
and the banks advised
deposit-holders
to withdraw money and put them
in money market funds.
The Ponzi scheme needed
everything it could.
NARRATOR:
American accounting firms
like KPMG
audited the Icelandic banks
and investment firms
and found nothing wrong.
And American credit-rating
agencies
said Iceland was wonderful.
In February 2007,
the rating agency
decided to upgrade the banks
to the highest possible rate,
triple-A.
It went so far as the
government here traveling
with the bankers
as a-- As a PR show.
NARRATOR:
When Iceland's banks collapsed
at the end of 2008,
unemployment tripled
in six months.
ZOEGA:
There is nobody unaffected
in Iceland.
INTERVIEWER:
So a lot of people here
lost their savings.
Yes, that's the case.
NARRATOR:
The government regulators
who should've been protecting
the citizens had done nothing.
You have two lawyers from the
regulator going down to a bank
to talk about some issue.
When they approach the bank,
they would see 19 SUVs
outside--
[LAUGHS]
Outside the bank.
You enter the bank,
and you have the 19 lawyers
sitting in front of
you, right,
very well prepared,
uh, ready to kill
any argument you make.
And then, if you do really
well, they'll offer you a job.
NARRATOR:
One-third of Iceland's
financial regulators
went to work for the banks.
But this is
a universal problem, huh?
In New York, you have
the same problem, right?
I'm on my way
I'm making it
I've got to make it show
Yeah
So much larger than life
I'm gonna watch it
Growing
INTERVIEWER:
What do you think of Wall
Street incomes these days?
Excessive.
INTERVIEWER:
I've been told it's difficult
for the IMF
to criticize the U.S.
I wouldn't say that.
We deeply regret
our breaches of U.S. law.
Is a small town
MAN:
They're amazed
at how much cocaine
these Wall Streeters can use
and get up
and go to work the next day.
But not me
I didn't know
what credit default swaps are.
I'm a little
bit old-fashioned.
I've been stretching
My mouth
INTERVIEWER:
Has Larry Summers
ever expressed remorse?
I don't hear confessions.
I've had enough
I'm getting out
To the city
The big, big city
I'll be a big nose
With all the big boys
MAN:
The government's
just writing checks.
That's plan A, that's plan B
and that's plan C.
INTERVIEWER:
Would you support legal
controls on executive pay?
I would not.
Big time
I'm on my way
INTERVIEWER:
Are you comfortable
with the compensation
in financial services?
If they've earned it.
Think they've earned it?
I think so.
Big time
INTERVIEWER:
You've helped these people
blow the world up?
You could say that.
So much larger than life
Big time
They were having massive
private gains at public loss.
Big time
Oh, oh, oh, oh, oh
MAN:
When you think you can create
something out of nothing
it's difficult to resist.
My parties have
All the big names
And I greet them
With the widest smile
Tell them how my life
Is one big adventure
WOMAN:
I'm concerned people want to
go back to the old way,
the way they were operating
prior to the crisis.
I had it made
Like a mountain range
With a snow-white pillow
For my big, fat head
I was getting a lot of
anonymous e-mails from
bankers saying:
"You can't quote me,
but I'm really concerned."
Walk through
The front door
Big time
I'm on my way, I'm making it
INTERVIEWER:
Why do you think there isn't a
more systematic investigation?
Because then you would
find the culprits.
Yeah, big time
INTERVIEWER:
You think Columbia
Business School
has any conflict-of-interest
problem?
I don't see that we do.
Big time
I'm gonna watch it growing
The regulators
didn't do their job.
They had the power to do
every case that I made.
They just didn't want to.
Big time
And the bulge in my big
Big, big, big
Big, big
REPORTER:
Lehman Brothers,
one of the most venerable
and biggest investment banks,
declared itself bankrupt.
Another, Merrill Lynch,
was forced to sell itself
today.
Financial markets are
down following
dramatic developments.
[SPEAKING IN CHINESE]
[MAN SPEAKING IN FRENCH]
NARRATOR:
In September 2008,
the bankruptcy of the U.S.
investment bank
Lehman Brothers
and the collapse of the
world's largest insurance
company, AIG,
triggered a global crisis.
MAN 1:
Fears gripped markets
overnight.
MAN 2:
Stocks fell off a cliff.
The largest single point drop
in history.
MAN 3:
Share prices continued
to tumble
in the aftermath
of the Lehman collapse.
[CROWD SHOUTING
IN FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
NARRATOR:
The result was
a global recession,
which cost the world
tens of trillions of dollars,
rendered 30 million people
unemployed
and doubled the national debt
of the United States.
If you look
at the cost of it,
destruction of equity wealth,
of housing wealth,
the destruction of income,
of jobs,
50 million people globally
could end up below
the poverty line again.
This is just a hugely,
hugely expensive crisis.
NARRATOR:
This crisis was not
an accident.
It was caused
by an out-of-control industry.
Since the 1980s,
the rise of the U.S. financial
sector has led to a series
of increasingly severe
financial crises.
Each crisis has caused
more damage,
while the industry has made
more and more money.
After the Great Depression
the United States had 40 years
of economic growth
without a single
financial crisis.
The financial industry
was tightly regulated.
Most regular banks
were local businesses
prohibited from speculating
with depositors' savings.
Investment banks, which
handled stock and
bond trading,
were small,
private partnerships.
In the traditional
investment banking model,
the partners
put the money up,
and obviously the partners
watch that money
very carefully.
They wanted to live well,
but they didn't want
to bet the ranch on anything.
NARRATOR:
Paul Volcker served
in the Treasury Department
and was chairman
of the Federal Reserve
from 1979 to 1987.
Before going into government,
he was a financial economist
at Chase Manhattan Bank.
When I left Chase
to go in the Treasury in 1969,
my income was in the
neighborhood of $45,000.
INTERVIEWER:
Forty-five thousand a year.
Morgan Stanley, in 1972,
had approximately
110 total personnel,
one office,
and capital of $12 million.
Now Morgan Stanley
has 50,000 workers
and has capital
of several billion
and has offices
all over the world.
NARRATOR:
In the 1980s, the financial
industry exploded.
The investment banks
went public,
giving them huge amounts
of stockholder money.
People on Wall Street
started getting rich.
I had a friend
who was a bond trader
at Merrill Lynch in the 1970s.
He had a job as
a train conductor at night
because he had three kids
and couldn't support them
on what a bond trader made.
By 1986, he was making
millions of dollars
and thought
it was because he was smart.
The highest order of business
before the nation
is to restore
our economic prosperity.
NARRATOR:
In 1981,
President Ronald Reagan
chose as Treasury secretary,
the CEO of the investment bank
Merrill Lynch, Donald Regan.
Wall Street and the president
do see eye to eye.
I've talked to leaders
of Wall Street.
They say, "We're behind
the president 100 percent."
NARRATOR:
The Reagan administration,
supported by economists
and financial lobbyists,
started a 30-year period
of financial deregulation.
In 1982,
the Reagan administration
deregulated
savings-and-loan companies,
allowing them
to make risky investments
with depositors' money.
By the end of the decade,
hundreds of savings-and-loan
companies had failed.
This crisis cost taxpayers
$124 billion
and cost many people
their life savings.
It may be the biggest bank
heist in our history.
NARRATOR:
Thousands of savings-and-loan
executives went to jail.
One of the most extreme cases
was Charles Keating.
MAN:
Mr. Keating, got a word?
In 1985,
when federal regulators
began investigating him,
Keating hired an economist
named Alan Greenspan.
In this letter to regulators,
Greenspan praised
Keating's sound business plans
and expertise
and said he saw no risk
in allowing Keating
to invest his
customers' money.
Keating reportedly
paid Greenspan $40,000.
Keating went to prison
shortly afterwards.
As for Alan Greenspan,
Reagan appointed him chairman
of America's central bank,
the Federal Reserve.
Greenspan was reappointed
by presidents Clinton
and George W. Bush.
During the Clinton
administration,
deregulation continued
under Greenspan
and Treasury secretaries
Robert Rubin,
the former CEO of the
investment bank Goldman Sachs,
and Larry Summers,
a Harvard economics professor.
The financial sector,
Wall Street being powerful,
having lobbies,
lots of money,
step by step,
captured the political system.
Both on the Democratic
and the Republican side.
By the late 1990s,
the financial sector
had consolidated
into a few gigantic firms,
each of them so large
that their failure could
threaten the whole system.
And the Clinton administration
helped them grow even larger.
In 1998,
Citicorp and Travelers merged
to form Citigroup,
the largest financial services
company in the world.
The merger violated
the Glass-Steagall Act,
a law passed after
the Great Depression,
which prevented banks
with consumer deposits
from engaging in risky
investment-banking activities.
It was illegal
to acquire Travelers.
Greenspan said nothing.
The Federal Reserve gave them
an exemption for a year,
and then they got
the law passed.
NARRATOR:
In 1999, at the urging
of Summers and Rubin,
Congress passed
the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act,
known to some
as the Citigroup Relief Act.
It overturned Glass-Steagall
and cleared the way
for future mergers.
Markets are
inherently unstable.
Or at least
potentially unstable.
An appropriate metaphor
is the oil tankers.
They are very big,
and therefore,
you have to put in
compartments
to prevent
the sloshing around of oil
from capsizing the boat.
The design of the boat
has to take that into account.
And after the Depression,
the regulations actually
introduced
these very watertight
compartments.
And deregulation has led
to the end
of compartmentalization.
NARRATOR:
The next crisis came
at the end of the '90s.
The investment banks fueled
a massive bubble
in Internet stocks,
which was followed by a crash
in 2001
that caused $5 trillion
in investment losses.
The Securities and Exchange
Commission, the federal agency
created during the Depression
to regulate investment
banking,
had done nothing.
In the absence of meaningful
federal action,
and given the clear failure
of self-regulation,
it has become necessary
for others to step in
and adopt the protections
needed.
NARRATOR:
Eliot Spitzer's investigation
revealed the investment banks
promoted Internet companies
they knew would fail.
Analysts were being paid
based on how much business
they brought in.
What they said publicly
was quite different
from what they said privately.
WOMAN:
Infospace, given the highest
possible rating,
dismissed by an analyst
as a "piece of junk."
Excite, also highly rated,
called "such a piece of crap."
The defense that was proffered
by many of the
investment banks
was not "you're wrong,"
it was, "Everybody's doing it,
everybody knows it's going on.
Nobody should rely
on these analysts anyway."
NARRATOR:
In December, 2002,
10 investment banks
settled the case
for a total of $1.4 billion
and promised
to change their ways.
Scott Talbott
is the chief lobbyist
for the Financial Services
Roundtable,
one of the most powerful
groups in Washington,
which represents nearly
all the largest
financial companies.
INTERVIEWER:
Are you comfortable that
several of your member
companies have engaged in
large-scale criminal activity?
You'll have to be specific.
Okay.
And first of all,
criminal activity
shouldn't be accepted,
period.
[BACHMAN-TURNER OVERDRIVE'S
"TAKIN' CARE OF BUSINESS"
PLAYING]
Since deregulation began,
the world's biggest
financial firms
have been laundering money,
defrauding customers
and cooking their books
again and again and again.
And I've been
Takin' care of business
Every day
Every way
I've been
Takin' care of business
It's all right
Credit Suisse funneled money
for Iran's nuclear program
and for the Aerospace
Industries Organization,
which builds ballistic
missiles.
MAN:
Any information that would ID
it as Iranian would be removed
NARRATOR:
The bank was fined
$536 million.
Citibank helped funnel
$100 million
of drug money out of Mexico.
WOMAN:
Did you comment
that she should, quote:
"Lose any documents connected
with the account"?
I said that in a kidding
manner at the early
stages of this.
I did not mean it seriously.
And we be
Takin' care of business
NARRATOR:
Between 1998 and 2003,
Fannie Mae overstated
its earnings
by more than $10 billion.
These accounting standards
are complex
and require determinations
over which experts
often disagree.
NARRATOR:
CEO Franklin Raines,
who used to be President
Clinton's budget director,
received over $52 million
in bonuses.
[APPLAUSE]
When UBS was caught helping
wealthy Americans evade taxes,
they refused to cooperate
with the government.
Would you be willing
to supply the names?
If there's a treaty framework.
No treaty framework.
You've agreed
you participated in a fraud.
Take good care
Of my business, whoo
MAN:
But while the companies face
unprecedented fines,
the investment firms do not
have to admit any wrongdoing.
When you're dealing with this
many products and customers,
mistakes happen.
INTERVIEWER:
Financial services industry
seems to have a level
of criminality
that is somewhat
distinctive.
You know, when was the last
time that Cisco or Intel
or Google or Apple or IBM,
you know--?
I agree about high-tech
versus financial services--
So how come? High-tech
is a creative business
where the value generation
and income derives from
actually creating
something new.
NARRATOR:
Beginning in the 1990s,
deregulation
and advances in technology
led to an explosion of complex
financial products
called derivatives.
Economists and bankers
claimed they made markets
safer.
But instead,
they made them unstable.
Since the end of the Cold War,
a lot of former physicists,
mathematicians,
decided to apply their skills,
not on, you know,
Cold War technology,
but on financial markets.
And together
with investment bankers--
INTERVIEWER:
Different weapons.
Absolutely. Warren Buffett
said, weapons of
mass destruction.
Regulators, politicians
and business people
did not take seriously the
threat of financial innovation
on the stability
of the financial system.
NARRATOR:
Using derivatives,
bankers could gamble
on virtually anything.
They could bet on the rise
or fall of oil prices,
the bankruptcy of a company,
even the weather.
By the late 1990s,
derivatives were
a 50-trillion-dollar
unregulated market.
In 1998, someone tried
to regulate them.
Brooksley Born graduated first
in her class
at Stanford Law School
and was the first woman
to edit a major law review.
After running the derivatives
practice at Arnold & Porter,
Born was appointed
by President Clinton
to chair the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission,
which oversaw
the derivatives market.
GREENBERGER:
Brooksley Born asked me
if I would work with her.
Uh, we decided that
this was a serious,
potentially destabilizing
market.
NARRATOR:
In May of 1998,
the CFTC issued a proposal
to regulate derivatives.
Clinton's Treasury Department
had an immediate response.
I happened to go
into Brooksley's office,
and she was just putting down
the receiver on her telephone,
and the blood had drained
from her face.
And she looked at me and said,
"That was Larry Summers."
He had 13 bankers
in his office.
He conveyed it
in a very bullying fashion,
sort of directing her to stop.
Banks were now reliant for
earnings on these activities.
And that led
to a titanic battle
to prevent this
from being regulated.
NARRATOR:
Shortly after the phone call
from Summers,
Greenspan, Rubin,
and SEC chairman Arthur Levitt
issued a joint statement
condemning Born
and recommending legislation
to keep derivatives
unregulated.
Regulation of
derivatives transactions
that are privately negotiated
by professionals is
unnecessary.
She was overruled,
unfortunately.
First by the Clinton
administration
and then by the Congress.
In 2000, Senator Phil Gramm
took a major role
in getting a bill passed
that pretty much exempted
derivatives from regulation.
They are unifying markets,
reducing regulatory burden.
I believe we need to do it.
It is our very great, uh, hope
that it will be possible
to move this year
on legislation that,
in a suitable way
goes to create legal certainty
for OTC, uh, derivatives.
I wish to associate myself
with all the remarks
of Secretary Summers.
NARRATOR:
In December of 2000,
Congress passed
the Commodity Futures
Modernization Act.
Written with the help of
financial-industry lobbyists,
it banned the regulation
of derivatives.
Once that was done,
it was off to the races.
And the use of derivatives
and financial innovation
exploded dramatically
after 2000.
MAN: So help me God.
So help me God.
NARRATOR:
By the time George W. Bush
took office in 2001,
the U.S. financial sector
was vastly more profitable,
concentrated and powerful
than ever before.
Dominating this industry
were five investment banks,
two financial conglomerates,
three securities
insurance companies
and three rating agencies.
And linking them all together
was the securitization
food chain.
A new system which connected
trillions of dollars
in mortgages and other loans
with investors
all over the world.
Thirty years ago, if you went
to get a loan for a home,
the person lending
you the money
expected you to pay
him or her back.
You got a loan from a lender
who wanted to be paid back.
We've since developed
securitization,
whereby people
who make the loan
are no longer at risk
if they fail to repay.
NARRATOR:
In the old system,
when a homeowner paid
their mortgage every month,
the money went
to their local lender.
And since mortgages
took decades to repay,
lenders were careful.
In the new system,
lenders sold mortgages to
investment banks.
The banks combined thousands
of mortgages and loans,
including car loans,
student loans,
and credit card debt,
to create complex derivatives
called collateralized
debt obligations,
or CDOs.
The investment banks then sold
the CDOs to investors.
Now when homeowners paid
their mortgages,
the money went to investors
all over the world.
The investment banks
paid rating agencies
to evaluate the CDOs,
and many of them
were given a triple-A rating,
which is the highest possible
investment grade.
This made CDOs popular
with retirement funds,
which could only purchase
highly rated securities.
This system
was a ticking time bomb.
Lenders didn't care anymore
about whether a borrower
could repay,
so they started making
riskier loans.
The investment banks
didn't care either.
The more CDOs they sold,
the higher their profits.
And the rating agencies,
which were paid
by the investment banks,
had no liability
if their ratings
of CDOs proved wrong.
You weren't
gonna be on the hook,
there weren't regulatory
constraints.
So it was a green light to
just pump out more
and more loans.
NARRATOR:
Between 2000 and 2003,
the number of mortgage loans
made each year
nearly quadrupled.
Everybody in this
securitization food chain,
from the very beginning
until the end,
didn't care about
the quality of the mortgage.
They were caring
about maximizing their volume
and getting a fee out of it.
NARRATOR:
In the early 2000s,
there was a huge increase
in the riskiest loans,
called subprime.
But when thousands
of subprime loans
were combined
to create CDOs,
many of them still received
triple-A ratings.
INTERVIEWER:
Now, t would have been
possible to create derivative
products that don't
have these risks,
that carry the equivalent
of deductibles,
where there are limits on the
risks that can be taken on,
and so forth.
They didn't do that, did they?
They didn't.
In retrospect,
they should've done.
They know they were doing
something dangerous?
I think they did.
All the incentives that the
financial institutions offered
to their mortgage brokers
were based on selling
the most profitable products,
which were predatory loans.
If they make more money,
that's where they'll put you.
NARRATOR:
Suddenly, hundreds of billions
of dollars a year
were flowing through
the securitization chain.
Since anyone
could get a mortgage,
home purchases and housing
prices skyrocketed.
The result was the biggest
financial bubble in history.
Real estate is real.
They can see their asset.
They can live in their asset,
they can rent out their asset.
You had a huge boom in housing
that made no sense at all.
The financing appetites
of the financial sector
drove what everybody else did.
Last time we had a housing
bubble was in the late '80s.
In that case,
the increase in home price
had been relatively minor.
That housing bubble led to
a relatively severe recession.
From 1996 until 2006,
real home prices
effectively doubled.
REPORTER:
At $500 a ticket,
they've come to hear
how to buy their very
own piece
of the American dream.
Goldman Sachs, Bear Stearns,
Lehman Brothers,
Merrill Lynch
were all in on this.
The subprime lending alone
increased from 30 billion
a year in funding
to over 600 billion a year
in 10 years.
They knew
what was happening.
NARRATOR:
Countrywide Financial,
the largest subprime lender,
issued $97 billion
worth of loans.
It made over $11 billion
in profits as a result.
On Wall Street,
annual cash bonuses spiked.
Traders and CEOs
became enormously wealthy
during the bubble.
Lehman Brothers was a top
underwriter of subprime
lending,
and their CEO, Richard Fuld,
took home $485 million.
On Wall Street,
this housing and credit bubble
was leading to hundreds of
billions of dollars
of profits.
You know, by 2006 about 40
percent of all profits
of S&P 500 firms was coming
from financial institutions.
It wasn't real profits
or income.
It was money created by the
system and booked as income.
Two, three years down the road
there's a default,
it's all wiped out.
I think it was, in fact,
in retrospect,
a great big national--
And not just national,
global Ponzi scheme.
NARRATOR:
Through the Home Ownership
and Equity Protection Act,
the Federal Reserve board
had broad authority
to regulate the mortgage
industry.
But Fed chairman Alan
Greenspan refused to use it.
Alan Greenspan said,
"No, that's regulation.
I don't believe in it."
NARRATOR:
For 20 years, Robert Gnaizda
was the head of Greenlining,
a powerful consumer
advocacy group.
He met with Greenspan
on a regular basis.
We gave him an example
of Countrywide
and 150 different complex
adjustable-rate mortgages.
He said, "If you had a
doctorate in math
you wouldn't be able
to understand them enough
to know which was good for you
and which wasn't."
So we thought
he was gonna take action.
But as the conversation
continued,
it was clear he was stuck
with his ideology.
We met again
with Greenspan in '05.
Often we met with him
twice a year,
and never less
than once a year.
And he wouldn't
change his mind.
In this amazing world of
instant global communications,
the efficient movement
of capital
is helping to create
the greatest prosperity
in human history.
A hundred and forty-six people
were cut from
the SEC Enforcement Division?
Is that what you also
testified?
Yes.
Yeah, I-- I think there has
been a-- A systematic gutting,
or whatever you wanna call it,
of the agency
and its capability
through cutting back of staff.
WELCH:
The SEC Office
of Risk Management
was reduced to a staff,
did you say, of one?
TURNER:
Yeah. When that gentleman
would go home,
he could turn the lights out.
NARRATOR:
During the bubble,
investment banks
were borrowing heavily
to buy more loans
and create more CDOs.
The ratio between borrowed
money and the banks' own money
was called leverage.
The more the banks borrowed,
the higher their leverage.
In 2004, Henry Paulson,
the CEO of Goldman Sachs,
helped lobby the SEC
to relax limits on leverage,
allowing the banks to sharply
increase their borrowing.
The SEC somehow decided
to let investment banks
gamble a lot more.
That was nuts. I don't know
why they did that,
but they did.
GOLDSCHMID:
[GOLDSCHMID LAUGHS]
NAZARETH:
CAMPOS:
DONALDSON:
MAN AND WOMAN:
ALPERT:
The degree of leverage
in the financial system
became absolutely frightening.
Investment banks leveraging
up to the level of 33-to-1.
Which means that
a tiny 3-percent decrease
in the value of their asset
base would leave
them insolvent.
There was another ticking time
bomb in the financial system.
AIG, the world's largest
insurance company,
was selling huge quantities
of derivatives
called credit default swaps.
For investors who owned CDOs,
credit default swaps worked
like an insurance policy.
An investor who purchased
a credit default swap
paid AIG a quarterly premium.
If the CDO went bad,
AIG promised to pay
the investor for their losses.
But unlike regular insurance,
speculators could also buy
credit default swaps from AIG
in order to bet against CDOs
they didn't own.
In insurance, you can only
insure something you own.
Let's say you and I
own property. I own a house.
I can only insure
that house once.
The derivatives universe
essentially enables anybody
to actually insure that house.
So you could insure that,
somebody else could.
So 50 people
might insure my house.
So, what happens is,
if my house burns down,
now the number of losses
in the system
becomes proportionately larger
NARRATOR:
Since credit default swaps
were unregulated,
AIG didn't have to put aside
any money
to cover potential losses.
Instead, AIG paid its
employees huge cash bonuses
as soon as contracts
were signed.
But if the CDOs
later went bad,
AIG would be on the hook.
People were essentially
being rewarded
for taking massive risks.
In good times, they generate
short-term revenues
and profits
and, therefore, bonuses.
But that's gonna lead
to the firm
to be bankrupt over time.
That's a total distorted
system of compensation.
NARRATOR:
AIG's Financial Products
division in London
issued $500 billion
worth of credit default swaps
during the bubble,
many of them for CDOs
backed by subprime mortgages.
The 400 employees at AIGFP
made $3.5 billion
between 2000 and 2007.
Joseph Cassano,
the head of AIGFP,
personally made $315 million.
CASSANO [ON RECORDING]:
It's hard for us,
and without being flippant,
to even see a scenario
within any kind
of realm of reason
that would see us losing
one dollar
in any of those transactions.
NARRATOR:
In 2007,
AIG's auditors
raised warnings.
One of them, Joseph St. Denis,
resigned in protest after
Cassano repeatedly blocked him
from investigating
AIGFP's accounting.
Let me tell you one person
that didn't get a bonus
while everybody else was.
That was St. Denis.
Mr. St. Denis, who tried
to alert the two of you
to the fact you were running
into big problems.
He quit in frustration,
and he didn't get a bonus.
NARRATOR:
In 2005, Raghuram Rajan,
then the chief economist of
the International
Monetary Fund,
delivered a paper
at the Jackson Hole symposium,
the most elite banking
conference in the world.
INTERVIEWER:
Who was in the audience?
It was, uh, I guess, the
central bankers of the world,
ranging from
Mr. Greenspan himself,
Ben Bernanke,
Larry Summers.
Tim Geithner was there.
The title of the paper
was essentially:
"Is Financial Development
Making the World Riskier?"
And the conclusion was,
um, it is.
NARRATOR:
Rajan's paper focused
on incentive structures
that generated
huge cash bonuses
based on short-term profits,
but which imposed no penalties
for later losses.
Rajan argued that these
incentives encouraged bankers
to take risks that might
eventually destroy
their own firms or even
the entire financial system.
RAJAN:
It's very easy to generate
performance
by taking on more risk.
So, what you need to do
is compensate
for risk-adjusted performance.
And that's where
all the bodies are buried.
Rajan, you know,
hit the nail on the head.
What he particularly said was:
"You guys have claimed
you've found a way
"to make more profits
with less risk.
"I say you found a way to make
more profits with more risk.
There's a big difference."
Summers was vocal.
He basically thought
that I was criticizing the
change in the financial world
and was worried about,
you know, regulation,
which would reverse
this change.
Essentially he accused me
of being a Luddite.
He wanted to make sure
that we didn't bring in
a whole new set of regulations
to constrain the financial
sector.
You're gonna make an extra
$2 million a year,
or $10 million a year,
for putting your financial
institution at risk.
Someone else pays the bill,
you don't.
Would you make that bet?
Most people on Wall Street
said, "Sure, I'd
make that bet."
[ACE FREHLEY'S
"NEW YORK GROOVE" PLAYS]
Many years
Since I was here
On the street I was passing
My time away
To the left
And to the right
Buildings towering
To the sky
It's out of sight
In the dead of night
Ooh
Here I am
And in this city
With a fistful
Of dollars
And baby
You'd better believe
I'm back
Back in the New York groove
GNAIZDA:
It never was enough.
They don't wanna own one home,
they wanna own five homes.
And they wanna have
an expensive penthouse
on Park Avenue.
And they wanna have
their own private jet.
INTERVIEWER:
You think this is an industry
where very high compensation
levels are justified?
I think I would take caution,
or take heed,
or take exception to your word
"very high." It's relative.
You have a 14-million-dollar
home in Florida.
You have a summer home
in Sun Valley, Idaho.
An art collection filled
with million-dollar paintings.
MAN:
Richard Fuld never appeared
on the trading floor.
There were art advisors there
all the time.
He had a private elevator.
He wanted to be disconnected.
His elevator, they hired
technicians to program it
so that his driver
would call in in the morning
and a security guard
would hold it.
There's only a three-second
window
where he actually
has to see people.
And he hops into this elevator
and it goes straight to 31.
INTERVIEWER:
Lehman owned corporate jets.
You know about this?
Yes.
INTERVIEWER:
How many?
MILLER:
Six, including the 767s.
Also had a helicopter.
INTERVIEWER:
Isn't that a lot of planes?
We're dealing with
type-A personalities.
They know everything
in the world.
Banking became
a pissing contest.
"Mine's bigger than yours."
That kind of stuff.
It was all men that ran it,
incidentally.
Fifty-billion-dollar deals
weren't large enough.
We'd do 100.
These people are risk-takers.
They're impulsive.
It's part of their behavior,
their personality.
And that manifests
outside of work as well.
It was quite typical
for the guys to go out
to go to strip bars,
to use drugs.
I see a lot of cocaine use,
use of prostitution.
Neuroscientists
have done experiments
where they've
taken individuals
and put them
into an MRI machine,
and they have them play a game
where the prize is money.
And they noticed that when
the subjects earn money,
the part of the brain
that gets stimulated
is the same part
that cocaine stimulates.
JONATHAN:
A lot of people feel they need
to participate in that
behavior to get promoted,
get recognized.
NARRATOR:
According to a Bloomberg
article,
business entertainment
represents 5 percent
of revenue
for derivatives brokers
and includes strip clubs,
prostitution and drugs.
A New York broker filed
a lawsuit in 2007
against his firm
alleging he was required
to retain prostitutes
to entertain traders.
There's just a blatant
disregard for the impact
their actions have on society,
on family.
They have no problem
using a prostitute
and going home to their wife.
INTERVIEWER:
How many customers?
About 10,000
at that point in time.
INTERVIEWER:
What fraction
were from Wall Street?
Of the higher-end clients,
probably 40 to 50 percent.
INTERVIEWER:
Were all major Wall Street
firms represented?
Goldman Sachs?
-Lehman Brothers.
They're all in there.
Morgan Stanley was
a little less of that.
I think Goldman was
pretty, pretty big with that.
DAVIS:
Clients would call and say:
"Can you get me a Lamborghini
for the girl?"
These guys were spending
corporate money.
I had many black cards from,
you know,
the various financial firms.
JONATHAN:
What's happening is services
are being charged
to computer repair.
Trading research, you know,
consulting for market
compliance.
I just gave them letterhead
and said,
"Make your own invoice."
INTERVIEWER:
This behavior extends to the
firm's senior management?
Absolutely does. Yeah.
I know for a fact
that it does.
It extends to the very top.
A friend of mine in a company
that has a big financial
presence said:
"It's about time you learned
about subprime mortgages."
So he set up a session
with his trading desk and me.
And the techie who did
all this gets very excited,
runs to his computer,
pulls up in about
three seconds
this Goldman Sachs
issue of securities.
It was a complete disaster.
Borrowers had borrowed,
on average,
99.3 percent
of the price of the house.
They have no money
in the house.
If anything goes wrong, they
walk away from the mortgage.
This is not a loan
you'd really make, right?
You've gotta be crazy.
But somehow,
you took 8000 of these loans,
and by the time
the guys were done
at Goldman Sachs
and the rating agencies,
two-thirds of the loans
were rated triple-A.
They were rated as safe
as government securities.
It's utterly mad.
NARRATOR:
Goldman Sachs sold at least
$3.1 billion worth
of these toxic CDOs
in the first half of 2006.
The CEO of Goldman Sachs
at this time was
Henry Paulson,
the highest paid CEO
on Wall Street.
Good morning.
I'm pleased to announce
that I will nominate
Henry Paulson
to be the Secretary
of the Treasury.
He has a lifetime
of experience.
He has knowledge
of financial markets.
He's earned a reputation
for candor and integrity.
NARRATOR:
You might think
it would be hard for Paulson
to adjust to a meager
government salary.
But taking the job
as Treasury secretary
was the best financial
decision of his life.
Paulson had to sell his
$485 million of Goldman stock
when he went to work
for the government.
But because of a law passed
by the first President Bush,
he didn't have to pay
any taxes on it.
It saved him $50 million.
SLOAN:
The article came out
in October of 2007.
Already, a third of
the mortgages defaulted.
Now most of them are going.
NARRATOR:
One group that had purchased
these now worthless securities
was the Public Employees'
Retirement System
of Mississippi,
which provides
monthly benefits
to over 80,000 retirees.
They lost millions of dollars
and are now suing
Goldman Sachs.
By late 2006, Goldman had
taken things a step further.
It didn't just sell
toxic CDOs,
it started actively
betting against them
at the same time
it was telling customers
that they were
high-quality investments.
By purchasing credit default
swaps from AIG,
Goldman could bet against
CDOs it didn't own
and get paid
when the CDOs failed.
I asked if anybody
called the customers and said:
"We don't really like this
kind of mortgage anymore,
and we thought
you ought to know."
They didn't say anything,
but you could feel the
laughter coming
over the phone.
NARRATOR:
Goldman Sachs bought
at least $22 billion
of credit default swaps
from AIG.
It was so much that Goldman
realized that AIG itself
might go bankrupt.
So they spent $150 million
insuring themselves
against AIG's
potential collapse.
Then in 2007,
Goldman went even further.
They started selling CDOs
specifically designed
so that the more money
their customers lost,
the more money
Goldman Sachs made.
Six hundred million dollars
of Timberwolf securities
is what you sold.
Before you sold them,
this is what your sales team
were telling to each other:
"Boy, that Timberwolf
was one shitty deal."
SPARKS:
This was an e-mail to me
in late June,
after the transaction.
And you sold Timberwolf--
No, no. You sold Timberwolf
after as well.
SPARKS:
We did trades after that.
Yeah. Okay. The next e-mail--
Take a look. July 1, '07.
--tells the sales force, "The
top priority is Timberwolf."
Your top priority to sell
is that shitty deal.
If you have an adverse
interest to a client,
do you have the duty
to disclose it?
To tell the client of your
adverse interest?
That's my question.
I'm trying to understand--
LEVIN:
You don't wanna answer.
Do you believe
that you have a duty
to act in the best interest
of your clients?
Again, I repeat, we have a
duty to serve our clients
by showing prices
on transactions
that they ask us
to show prices for.
What do you think
about selling securities
which your own people
think are crap?
Does that bother you?
BLANKFEIN:
I think they would.
As a hypothetical?
LEVIN: No, this is real.
Well, then I don't know--
LEVIN: We heard it today.
We heard it today. "This is a
shitty deal." "This is crap."
I-- I heard nothing today
that makes me think
anything went wrong.
Is there not a conflict when
you sell something to somebody
and then are determined to bet
against that same security,
and you don't disclose that
to the person
you're selling it to?
Do you see a problem?
In the context of market
making, that is
not a conflict.
LEVIN:
When you heard your employees
in e-mails said,
"God, what a shitty deal,"
"God, what a piece of crap,"
do you feel anything?
That's unfortunate
to have on e-mail.
LEVIN: Are you embar--?
[PEOPLE LAUGH AND GROAN]
And very unfortunate--
I don't--
LEVIN:
"On e-mail"?
How about feeling that way?
It's very unfortunate for
anyone to have said
that in any form.
Are your competitors engaged
in similar activities?
Uh, yes, and to a greater
extent than us in most cases.
NARRATOR:
Hedge fund manager
John Paulson made $12 billion
betting against
the mortgage market.
When Paulson ran out
of mortgage securities
to bet against,
he worked with Goldman Sachs
and Deutsche Bank
to create more.
Morgan Stanley was also
selling mortgage securities
it was betting against,
and it's now being sued
by the Government Employees'
Retirement Fund
of the Virgin Islands
for fraud.
The lawsuit alleges
that Morgan Stanley knew
that the CDOs were junk.
Although they were
rated triple-A,
Morgan Stanley
was betting they would fail.
A year later,
Morgan Stanley had made
hundreds of millions
of dollars,
while the investors had lost
almost all of their money.
You would have thought
pension funds would have said:
"Those are subprime.
Why am I buying them?"
They had these guys at Moody's
and Standard & Poor's
who said,
"That's a triple-A."
No securities got issued
without the seal of approval
of the rating agencies.
NARRATOR:
The three rating agencies,
Moody's, S&P and Fitch,
made billions of dollars
giving high ratings
to risky securities.
Moody's, the largest
rating agency,
quadrupled its profits
between 2000 and 2007.
Moody's and S&P
get compensated
based on putting out
ratings reports.
And the more structured
securities
they gave a triple-A rating
to, the higher their earnings.
Imagine going to
The Times saying:
"Write a positive story,
I'll pay you $500,000.
If you don't,
I'll give nothing."
Rating agencies could have
stopped the party and said:
"Sorry. We're gonna tighten
our standards,"
and immediately cut off
the funding to
risky borrowers.
Triple-A-rated instruments
mushroomed from just a handful
to thousands and thousands.
Hundreds of billions
of dollars
were being rated,
you know, and--
INTERVIEWER: Per year?
Per year. Oh, yeah.
I've now testified before
both houses of Congress
on the credit rating
agency issue,
and both times they trot out
very prominent
First Amendment lawyers
and argue that, "When we say
something is rated triple-A,
that is merely our 'opinion.'
You shouldn't rely on it."
S&P's ratings express
our opinion.
Our ratings are our opinions.
They're opinions.
Opinions.
And they are just opinions.
I think we are emphasizing
the fact
that our ratings are opinions.
They do not speak to the
market value of a security,
the volatility of its price,
or its suitability
as an investment.
We have many economists
coming on and saying:
"Oh. This is a bubble,
it's going to burst.
This is going to be
an issue for the economy."
Some say it could even cause
a recession at some point.
What is the worst-case
scenario if, in fact,
we were to see prices come
down substantially
across the country?
I don't buy your premise.
It's an unlikely possibility.
We've never had a decline
in house prices
on a nationwide basis.
NARRATOR:
Ben Bernanke became chairman
of the Federal Reserve
in February 2006, the top year
for subprime lending.
But despite numerous warnings,
Bernanke and the Federal
Reserve Board did nothing.
Robert Gnaizda
met with Bernanke
and the Federal Reserve Board
three times after
Bernanke became chairman.
Only at the last meeting
did he suggest
that there was a problem
and that the government
ought to look into it.
INTERVIEWER:
When was that? What year?
It's 2009, March 11th,
in D.C.
This year?
This year we met, yes.
And so for the two
previous years you met him.
Even in 2008?
Yes.
NARRATOR:
One of the six
Federal Reserve Board
governors serving under
Bernanke was Frederic Mishkin,
who was appointed
by President Bush in 2006.
INTERVIEWER:
Did you participate
in the meetings Robert Gnaizda
and Greenlining had
with the Federal
Reserve Board?
Yes, I did. I was on the
committee that was involved
with the Consumer Community
Affairs Committee.
INTERVIEWER:
He warned,
in an explicit manner,
about what was going on and
came to the Federal
Reserve Board
with loan documentation
of the kind of loans
frequently being made.
And he was listened to
politely, and nothing
was done.
So again, I don't know
the details in terms of, um...
In fact, I--
I just don't-- I--
Whatever information he
provided, I'm not sure
exactly.
To be honest, I can't remember
this kind of discussion,
but certainly there were
issues that were coming up.
The question is,
how pervasive are they?
INTERVIEWER:
Why didn't you try looking?
I think people did.
We had people looking at--
INTERVIEWER:
Excuse me. You can't be
serious. You would have
found things.
-That's easy to say that you
can always find it.
NARRATOR:
As early as 2004,
the FBI was already warning
about an epidemic
of mortgage fraud.
They reported inflated
appraisals,
doctored loan documentation
and other fraudulent activity.
In 2005, the IMF's chief
economist, Raghuram Rajan,
warned that dangerous
incentives
could lead to a crisis.
Then came Nouriel Roubini's
warnings in 2006,
Allan Sloan's articles
in Fortune magazine
and The Washington Post
in 2007,
and repeated warnings
from the IMF.
I said, and on behalf
of the institution,
the crisis in front of us
is a huge crisis.
INTERVIEWER: Who'd you talk
to? Government, Treasury, Fed.
NARRATOR:
In May of 2007,
hedge fund manager Bill Ackman
circulated a presentation,
"Who is Holding the Bag?"
which described
how the bubble would unravel.
And in early 2008,
Charles Morris
published his book
about the impending crisis.
You're not sure.
What do you do?
You might have some suspicions
that underwriting standards
are weakened.
But then the question is,
should you do anything about
it?
NARRATOR:
By 2008, home foreclosures
were skyrocketing
and the securitization
food chain imploded.
Lenders could no longer
sell their loans
to the investment banks.
And as the loans went bad,
dozens of lenders failed.
Chuck Prince of Citibank
famously said that, uh--
We have to dance
until the music stops.
Actually, the music had
stopped already when he
said that.
NARRATOR:
The market for CDOs collapsed,
leaving the investment banks
holding hundreds of billions
of dollars in loans,
CDOs, and real estate
they couldn't sell.
When the crisis started,
both the Bush administration
and the Federal Reserve
were totally behind the curve.
They did not understand
the extent of it.
INTERVIEWER:
At what point do you remember
thinking for the first time:
"This is dangerous,
this is bad"?
I remember very well one--
I think it was a G7 meeting
of February, 2008.
And I remember discussing
the issue with Hank Paulson.
And I clearly remember
telling Hank:
"We are watching
this tsunami coming,
"and you're just proposing
that we ask
which swimming costume
we're going to put on."
INTERVIEWER:
What was his response?
"Things are under control.
"Yes, we are looking
at this situation carefully,
and, uh, yeah,
it's under control."
We're gonna keep growing.
Okay? And, obviously,
I'll say it:
If you're growing,
you're not in
recession, right?
I mean, we--
We all know that.
REPORTER:
One of the pillars
of Wall Street...
NARRATOR:
In March 2008,
the investment bank
Bear Stearns ran out of cash
and was acquired for $2 a
share by JPMorgan Chase.
The deal was backed
by $30 billion in
emergency guarantees
from the Federal Reserve.
That was when the
administration could
have come in
and put in place
various kinds of measures
that would have reduced
system risk.
The information I'm receiving
is the end is not here,
that there are other shoes
to fall.
Well, I've seen
those investment banks,
working with the Fed
and the SEC,
strengthen their liquidity,
strengthen their--
Their capital positions.
I get reports all the time.
Our regulators are--
Are very vigilant.
NARRATOR:
On September 7th, 2008,
Henry Paulson announced
the federal takeover
of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac,
two giant mortgage lenders
on the brink of collapse.
Nothing about our actions
today reflects a changed view
of the housing correction
or the strength of other
U.S. financial institutions.
NARRATOR:
Two days later,
Lehman Brothers
announced record losses
of $3.2 billion,
and its stock collapsed.
INTERVIEWER:
The effects of Lehman and AIG
in September still came
as a surprise.
I mean, this is even after
July and Fannie and Freddie.
So clearly there was stuff
that, as of September,
major stuff,
that nobody knew about.
I think that's--
I think that's fair.
INTERVIEWER:
Bear Stearns was rated
triple-A
like a month
before it went bankrupt?
More likely A2.
A2?
Yeah.
Okay.
A2 is still not bankrupt.
No, that's a high
investment grade.
Solid investment grade rating.
Lehman Brothers,
A2 within days of failing.
AIG, double-A
within days of being
bailed out.
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac
were triple-A
when they were rescued.
Citigroup, Merrill, all of
them had investment-
grade ratings.
How can that be?
Well, that's a good question.
[LAUGHING]
That's a great question.
INTERVIEWER:
At no point did
the administration go
to all major institutions
and say:
"This is serious. Tell us
what your positions are.
You know, no bullshit.
Where are you?"
Well, first, that's what the
regulators-- That's their job.
Their job is to understand
the exposure
across these different
institutions.
And they have
a very refined understanding
that I think became more
refined as the
crisis proceeded. So--
INTERVIEWER:
Forgive me,
but that's clearly not true.
What do you mean,
that's not true?
INTERVIEWER:
In August of 2008,
were you aware of the
credit ratings held by
Lehman Brothers,
Merrill Lynch, AIG,
and did you think
that they were accurate?
Well, uh,
certainly by that time,
it was clear earlier credit
ratings weren't accurate.
They had been downgraded.
INTERVIEWER: No, they hadn't.
There was downgrading
in terms of the industry
and concerns of the--
All those firms were rated
at least A2
until a couple of days
before they were rescued.
The answer is
I don't know enough
to answer your question
on this particular issue.
Governor Fred Mishkin is
resigning, effective
August 31.
He plans to return to teaching
at Columbia's
Graduate School of Business.
INTERVIEWER:
Why did you leave the Federal
Reserve in August of 2008
in the middle
of the worst financial crisis?
So that--
I had to revise a textbook.
His departure leaves the board
with three
of its seven seats vacant
just when the economy
needs it most.
INTERVIEWER:
I'm sure your textbook is
important and widely read,
but in August 2008,
some more important things
were going on,
don't you think?
NARRATOR:
By Friday, September 12th,
Lehman Brothers
had run out of cash
and the entire
investment-banking industry
was sinking fast.
The stability of the global
financial system
was in jeopardy.
That weekend, Henry Paulson
and Timothy Geithner
president of the New York
Federal Reserve,
called an emergency meeting
with the CEOs
of the major banks
in an effort to rescue Lehman.
But Lehman wasn't alone.
Merrill Lynch was also
on the brink of failure.
And that Sunday, it was
acquired by Bank of America.
The only bank interested
in buying Lehman
was the British firm Barclays.
But British regulators
demanded a financial guarantee
from the U.S. government.
Paulson refused.
We all jumped
into a yellow cab
and went down
to the Federal Reserve Bank.
They wanted the bankruptcy
case commenced before midnight
of September 14.
We kept pressing
that this would be
a terrible event,
and at some point
I used the word Armageddon,
and they consider
the consequences
of what they were proposing.
The effect on the market
would be extraordinary.
INTERVIEWER: You said this?
Yes.
They just said
they had considered
all of the comments
that we had made,
and they were still
of the belief
that in order
to calm the markets
and move forward,
it was necessary
for Lehman to go
into bankruptcy.
"Calm the markets"?
Yes.
INTERVIEWER:
When were you first told
that Lehman, in fact,
was going to go bankrupt?
After the fact.
After the fact?
Wow. Okay. Um...
And what was your reaction
when you learned of it?
"Holy cow."
NARRATOR:
Paulson and Bernanke
had not consulted
with other governments and
didn't understand
the consequences of foreign
bankruptcy laws.
MAN:
--Lehman Brothers London--
Under British law,
Lehman's London office
had to be closed immediately.
Transactions came
to a halt,
and there are thousands
and thousands of transactions.
The hedge funds who had
assets with Lehman in London
discovered overnight
to complete horror
they couldn't get
those assets back.
One of the points
of the hub failed.
And that had huge knock-on
effects around the system.
The oldest money market fund
in the nation
wrote off three-quarters
of a billion dollars
in bad debt
issued by now-bankrupt
Lehman Brothers.
NARRATOR:
Lehman's failure
caused a collapse
in the commercial
paper market,
which many companies depend on
to pay for expenses
such as payroll.
They have to lay off
employees, they
can't buy parts.
It stops business
in its tracks.
People stood and said,
"What can we believe in?
There's nothing
we can trust anymore."
NARRATOR:
That same week,
AIG owed $13 billion
to holders
of credit default swaps,
and it didn't have the money.
SHENG:
AIG was another hub.
If AIG had stopped, you know,
all planes
may have to stop flying.
NARRATOR:
On September 17th, AIG is
taken over by the government.
One day later, Paulson
and Bernanke ask Congress
for $700 billion
to bail out the banks.
They warned
that the alternative
would be a catastrophic
financial collapse.
It was scary. You know,
the entire system froze up.
Every part of the financial
system,
every part
of the credit system.
Nobody could borrow money.
It was like a cardiac
arrest of the global
financial system.
I'm playing the hand dealt me.
A lot of what I'm
dealing with--
You know, I'm dealing
with the consequences
of things that were done
often many years ago.
McCORMICK:
Paulson spoke through
the fall.
All the potential
root causes of this,
he called them. I'm not sure--
INTERVIEWER: You're not
serious.
I am being serious.
What would you have expected?
What were you looking for
that you didn't see?
INTERVIEWER:
He was the senior advocate
for prohibiting the regulation
of credit default swaps
and also lifting
the leverage limits
on the investment banks.
So again, what--?
He mentioned those things?
I never heard him
mention those things.
Could we turn this off
for a second?
NARRATOR:
When AIG was bailed out,
the owners of
its credit default swaps,
the most prominent of which
was Goldman Sachs,
were paid $61 billion
the next day.
Paulson, Bernanke
and Tim Geithner
forced AIG to pay 100 cents
on the dollar
rather than negotiate
lower prices.
Eventually, the AIG bailout
cost taxpayers
over $150 billion.
A hundred and sixty billion
dollars went through AIG.
Fourteen billion
went to Goldman Sachs.
At the same time,
Paulson and Geithner
forced AIG
to surrender its right
to sue Goldman
and the other banks for fraud.
INTERVIEWER:
Isn't there a problem
when the person in charge
of dealing with this crisis
is the former CEO
of Goldman Sachs?
Someone who had a major role
in causing it.
It's fair to say
that the financial markets
today
are incredibly complicated.
--and supply
urgently needed money.
NARRATOR:
On October 4th, 2008,
President Bush signs
a 700-billion-dollar
bailout bill.
But world stock markets
continue to fall
amid fears that a global
recession is now underway.
The bailout legislation
does nothing
to stem the tide of layoffs
and foreclosures.
Unemployment
in the United States
and Europe
quickly rises to 10 percent.
The recession accelerates
and spreads globally.
I began to get really scared
because I hadn't foreseen
the whole world going down at
the same rate at the
same time.
NARRATOR:
By December of 2008,
General Motors and Chrysler
are facing bankruptcy.
And as U.S. consumers cut back
on spending,
Chinese manufacturers
see sales plummet.
Over 10 million migrant
workers in China lose
their jobs.
At the end of the day,
the poorest, as always,
pay the most.
WOMAN:
DANIEL:
We were growing
at about 20 percent.
It was a super year.
Then we suddenly went
to minus-nine this quarter.
Exports collapsed, and we're
talking like 30 percent.
So we just took a hit, you
know. Fell off a cliff. Boomp.
Even as the crisis unfolded,
we didn't know how wide
it was going to spread
or how severe
it was going to be.
We were still hoping
that there would be some way
for us to have a shelter and
be less battered by the storm.
But it's not possible.
It's a very globalized world.
The economies
are all linked together.
Every time a home
goes into foreclosure,
it affects everyone who lives
around that house.
When that property
goes on the market,
it'll be sold at a
lower price.
Maybe before
it goes on the market,
it won't be well-maintained.
We estimate 9 million
homeowners will lose
their homes.
[SPEAKING IN SPANISH]
The majority I've seen are
people hurt by the economy.
They were living day to day,
paycheck to paycheck,
and that ran out.
Unemployment won't pay
a mortgage.
It won't pay a car bill.
STEPHEN:
I was a log truck driver.
And they shut down
the logging systems,
shut down the sawmills.
So I moved down here
on a construction job.
And the construction jobs
got shut down too, so...
Things are tough. There's a
lot of people out there.
Soon you're gonna see
more camps like this.
There's no jobs.
When the company did well,
we did well.
When the company did not do
well, sir, we did not do well.
NARRATOR:
The men who destroyed
their own companies
and plunged the world
into crisis
walked away from the wreckage
with their fortunes intact.
The top five executives
at Lehman Brothers
made over a billion dollars
between 2000 and 2007.
And when the firm
went bankrupt,
they got to keep
all the money.
The system worked.
It doesn't make sense to
make a failing loan
because we lose.
The borrower loses, the
community loses and we lose.
NARRATOR:
Countrywide's CEO,
Angelo Mozilo,
made $470 million
between 2003 and 2008.
One hundred forty million
came from dumping
his Countrywide stock
in the 12 months
before the company collapsed.
I hold the board accountable
when a business fails.
They're responsible for hiring
and firing the CEO
and overseeing
strategic decisions.
The problem with boards
is the way boards are elected.
Boards are pretty much, in
many cases, picked by the CEO.
The board of directors
and compensation committees
are the two bodies best
situated to determine
pay for executives.
INTERVIEWER:
How do you think they've done
over the past 10 years?
If you look at those-- I would
give about a B, because--
A B?
A B, yes.
Not an F?
Not an F, not an F.
NARRATOR:
Stan O'Neal,
the CEO of Merrill Lynch,
received $90 million
in 2006 and 2007 alone.
After driving his firm
into the ground,
the board of directors
allowed him to resign,
and he collected $161 million
in severance.
INTERVIEWER:
Instead of being fired,
Stan O'Neal is allowed to
resign and takes
away $151 million.
That's a decision that
that board of directors made.
What grade do you give
that decision?
That's a tougher one. I don't
know if I'd give it a B.
NARRATOR:
O'Neal's successor,
John Thain,
was paid $87 million in 2007.
And in December of 2008,
two months after Merrill was
bailed out by U.S. taxpayers,
Thain and Merrill's board
handed out billions
in bonuses.
In March of 2008, AIG's
Financial Products division
lost $11 billion.
Instead of being fired,
Joseph Cassano, head of AIGFP,
was kept on as a consultant
for a million dollars a month.
You wanna make sure
key players
and key employees
within AIGFP,
we retain that
intellectual knowledge.
I attended
a very interesting dinner
organized by Hank Paulson
a little more than one
year ago
with some officials
and a couple of CEOs
from the biggest banks
in the U.S.
And, uh,
surprisingly enough,
all these gentlemen
were arguing:
"We were too greedy,
so we have part of
the responsibility." Fine.
Then they were turning
to the treasurer,
Secretary of the Treasury,
and saying:
"Regulate more. We're too
greedy, we can't avoid it.
The only way to avoid this
is to have more regulation."
INTERVIEWER:
I have spoken to many bankers
about this,
including very senior ones.
And this is the first time
that I've ever heard
anybody say
they wanted their compensation
to be regulated in any way.
Yeah, because it was at the
moment where they were afraid.
And after, when solution
to the crisis began to appear,
then probably
they changed their mind.
NARRATOR:
In the U.S., the banks
are now bigger, more powerful
and more concentrated
than ever before.
There are fewer competitors.
A lot of smaller banks have
been taken over by big ones.
J.P. Morgan is even bigger
than it was before.
J.P. Morgan took over first
Bear Stearns and then WaMu.
Bank of America took over
Countrywide and Merrill Lynch.
Wells Fargo took over
Wachovia.
NARRATOR:
After the crisis,
the financial industry,
including the Financial
Services Roundtable,
worked harder than ever
to fight reform.
The financial sector
employs 3000 lobbyists,
more than five
for each member of Congress.
INTERVIEWER:
You think the financial
services industry
has political influence
in the U.S.?
No. I think that every
person in the country
is represented
here in Washington.
INTERVIEWER:
And you think that all
segments of American society
have equal and fair access
to the system?
That you can walk
into any hearing room
that you would like.
Yes, I do.
One can walk into
any hearing room.
One cannot write
the lobbying checks
that your industry writes
or engage in the level
of political contributions
your industry engages in.
NARRATOR:
Between 1998 and 2008,
the financial industry
spent over $5 billion
on lobbying
and campaign contributions.
And since the crisis, they're
spending even more money.
The financial industry
also exerts its influence
in a more subtle way,
one that most Americans
don't know about.
It has corrupted the study
of economics itself.
Deregulation had tremendous
financial and
intellectual support
because people argued it
for their own benefit.
The economics profession
was the main source
of that illusion.
Since the 1980s,
academic economists
have been major advocates
of deregulation
and played powerful roles in
shaping U.S.
government policy.
Very few of these
economic experts
warned about the crisis.
And even after the crisis,
many of them opposed reform.
The guys who taught
these things
tended to get paid
a lot of money
being consultants.
Business school professors
don't live on a
faculty salary.
They do very, very well.
INTERVIEWER:
Over the last decade, the
financial services industries
made about $5 billion worth
of political contributions
in the United States, um...
That's kind of
a lot of money.
That doesn't bother you?
No.
NARRATOR:
Martin Feldstein
is a professor at Harvard
and one of the world's
prominent economists.
As President Reagan's
chief economic advisor,
he was a major architect
of deregulation.
And from 1988 until 2009,
he was on the board
of directors of both AIG
and AIG Financial Products,
which paid him
millions of dollars.
INTERVIEWER:
You have any regrets about
having been on AIG's board?
I have no comments.
No, I have no regrets.
INTERVIEWER: None?
That I can say.
Absolutely none.
Okay. Um...
You have any regrets
about AIG's decisions?
I cannot say anything more
about AIG.
I've taught at Northwestern in
Chicago, Harvard and Columbia.
NARRATOR:
Glenn Hubbard is the dean
of Columbia Business School
and was chairman of the
Council of Economic Advisers
under George W. Bush.
INTERVIEWER:
Do you think the financial
services industry
has too much political power
in the U.S.?
I don't think so. No.
You certainly wouldn't
get that impression
by the drubbing that they
regularly get in Washington.
NARRATOR:
Many prominent academics
quietly make fortunes
while helping
the financial industry
shape public debate
and government policy.
The Analysis Group,
Charles River Associates,
Compass Lexecon,
and the Law and Economics
Consulting Group,
manage a multibillion-dollar
industry
that provides academic experts
for hire.
Two bankers
who used these services
were Ralph Cioffi
and Matthew Tannin,
Bear Stearns
hedge fund managers
prosecuted
for securities fraud.
After hiring
the Analysis Group,
both were acquitted.
Glenn Hubbard was paid
$100,000 to testify in
their defense.
INTERVIEWER:
Do you think the economics
discipline
has a conflict-of-interest
problem?
I'm not sure
I know what you mean.
Do you think
a significant fraction
of the economics discipline,
economists,
have financial
conflicts of interest
that might call into question
or color--?
I see what you're saying.
I doubt it.
Most academic economists
aren't wealthy
business people.
NARRATOR:
Hubbard makes $250,000 a year
as a board member of MetLife
and was formerly
on the board of Capmark,
a major commercial mortgage
lender during the bubble,
which went bankrupt in 2009.
He has also advised
Nomura Securities,
KKR Financial Corporation
and many other
financial firms.
Laura Tyson, who declined to
be interviewed for this film,
is a professor at the
University of California,
Berkeley.
She was the chair of the
Council of Economic Advisers,
then director of the National
Economic Council under
Clinton.
After leaving government,
she joined the board
of Morgan Stanley,
which pays her
$350,000 a year.
Ruth Simmons,
president of Brown University,
makes over $300,000 a year
on the board of Goldman Sachs.
Larry Summers, who, as
Treasury secretary,
played a role
in the deregulation
of derivatives,
became president of Harvard
in 2001.
While at Harvard,
he made millions
consulting to hedge funds
and millions more
in speaking fees, much of it
from investment banks.
According to his federal
disclosure report,
Summers' net worth
is between $16.5
and $39.5 million.
Frederic Mishkin, who returned
to Columbia Business School
after leaving
the Federal Reserve,
reported on his
disclosure report
that his net worth was between
$6 million and $17 million.
INTERVIEWER:
In 2006, you coauthored a
study of Iceland's financial
system.
- "Iceland is an
advanced country
"with excellent institutions,
low corruption, rule of law.
"The economy has adjusted
to financial liberalization
"while prudential regulation
and supervision
is generally strong."
And that was the mistake,
that it turns out
prudential regulation
and supervision
was not strong in Iceland
during this period--
What led you to think it was?
You're going with
the information you had
and generally, the view
was that Iceland
had very good institutions.
It was an advanced country--
Who told you that?
What research did you do?
You talk to people. You have
faith in the central bank,
which actually did
fall down on the job.
That clearly it-- This--
Why have faith
in a central bank?
Well, that faith-- You try--
Because you go with
the information you have.
How much were you paid
to write it?
I was-- I think the number--
It's public information.
INTERVIEWER:
On your CV, the title of this
report has been changed
from "Financial Stability
in Iceland"
to "Financial Instability
in Iceland."
I don't know. Whatever it is--
If there's a typo,
there's a typo.
What should be publicly
available
is whenever anybody
does research on a topic
that they disclose
if they have
any financial conflict
with that research.
INTERVIEWER:
But if I recall,
there is no policy
to that effect.
I can't imagine anybody
not doing that in terms of
putting it in a paper.
There would be significant
professional sanction
for failure to do that.
INTERVIEWER:
I didn't see any place
in the study
where you indicated
you'd been paid
by the Icelandic Chamber
of Commerce to produce it.
No, I don't-- You know.
Okay.
NARRATOR:
Richard Portes, the most
famous economist in Britain
and a professor at
London Business School,
was also commissioned by the
Icelandic Chamber of Commerce
to write a report which
praised the Icelandic
financial sector.
The banks themselves
are highly liquid.
They've made money on the fall
of the Icelandic króna.
These are strong banks.
Their market funding is
assured for the coming year.
These are well-run banks.
NARRATOR:
Like Mishkin, Portes' report
didn't disclose his payment
from the Icelandic
Chamber of Commerce.
INTERVIEWER:
Does Harvard require
disclosures
of financial
conflict of interest?
Not to my knowledge.
Do you require people
to report the compensation
received from outside
activities?
No.
Don't you think
that's a problem?
I don't see why.
INTERVIEWER:
Martin Feldstein
on the board of AIG,
Laura Tyson at Morgan Stanley,
Larry Summers making
$10 million consulting
to financial services firms.
Irrelevant?
Hm. Yeah.
Yeah. Basically irrelevant.
INTERVIEWER:
You've written many articles
about a wide array of
subjects.You never saw fit
to investigate the risks
of unregulated
credit default swaps?
I never did.
Same question with regard
to executive compensation?
The regulation
of corporate governance?
The effect of political
contributions?
I don't know that I would have
anything to add
to those discussions.
INTERVIEWER:
I'm looking at your
résumé now.
Looks to me as if the majority
of your outside activities
are consulting
and directorship arrangements
with the financial
services industry.
Would you not agree with that?
To my knowledge,
I don't think my consulting
clients are on my CV.
So I wouldn't know.
Who are your
consulting clients?
I don't have
to discuss that with you.
Okay.
In fact,
you have a few more minutes
and the interview's over.
INTERVIEWER:
Do you consult for
financial services firms?
The answer is I do.
And?
And-- But I do not wanna go
into details about that.
INTERVIEWER:
Do they include other
financial services firms?
Possibly.
You don't remember?
This isn't a deposition, sir.
I was polite enough
to give you time.
Foolishly, I now see.
But you have
three more minutes.
Give it your best shot.
NARRATOR:
In 2004, at the height
of the bubble,
Glenn Hubbard coauthored
a widely read paper
with William C. Dudley,
the chief economist
of Goldman Sachs.
In the paper, Hubbard praised
credit derivatives
and the securitization chain,
stating they had improved
allocation of capital
and were enhancing
financial stability.
He cited reduced volatility
in the economy
and stated that recessions had
become less frequent and
milder.
Credit derivatives were
protecting banks a
gainst losses
and helping to
distribute risk.
INTERVIEWER:
A medical researcher
writes an article, saying:
"To treat this disease, you
should prescribe this drug."
Turns out doctor makes
80 percent of personal income
from manufacture of this drug.
Does not bother you?
I think it's certainly
important to disclose
the, um...
The, um...
Well, I think that's also
a little different
from cases that we're talking
about here because, um...
Um...
INTERVIEWER:
So, what do you think this
says about the economics
discipline?
-Well, I mean, it has no
relevance to anything, really.
And, indeed, I think
it's a part of the--
It's an important part
of the problem.
NARRATOR:
The rising power
of the U.S. financial sector
was part of a wider change
in America.
Since the 1980s,
the United States
has become a more
unequal society,
and its economic dominance
has declined.
Companies like General Motors,
Chrysler and U.S. Steel,
formerly the core
of the U.S. economy,
were poorly managed
and falling behind their
foreign competitors.
And as countries like China
opened their economies,
American companies sent jobs
overseas to save money.
For many, many years,
the 660 million people
in the developed world
were sheltered
from all of this
additional labor
that existed on the planet.
Suddenly the Bamboo Curtain
and the Iron Curtain
are lifted
and you have 2.5 billion
additional people.
NARRATOR:
American factory workers
were laid off
by the tens of thousands.
Our manufacturing base
was destroyed, literally,
over a few years.
NARRATOR:
As manufacturing declined,
other industries rose.
The United States
leads the world
in information technology,
where high-paying jobs
are easy to find.
But those jobs
require an education.
And for average Americans,
college is increasingly
out of reach.
While top private universities
like Harvard
have billions of dollars
in their endowments,
funding for public
universities is shrinking
and tuition is rising.
Tuition for California's
public universities
rose from $650
in the 1970s
to over $10,000 in 2010.
Increasingly, the most
important determinant
of whether Americans
go to college
is whether they can find
the money to pay for it.
Meanwhile, American tax policy
shifted to favor the wealthy.
When I first came to office,
I thought taxes were too high,
and they were.
The most dramatic change
was a series of tax cuts
designed by Glenn Hubbard,
who was serving
as President Bush's
chief economic advisor.
The Bush administration
sharply reduced taxes
on investment gains,
stock dividends,
and eliminated
the estate tax.
We had a comprehensive plan
that, when acted,
has left nearly $1.1 trillion
in the hands
of American workers,
families, investors
and small-business owners.
NARRATOR:
Most of the benefits
of these tax cuts
went to the wealthiest
1 percent of Americans.
And by the way,
it was really the cornerstone
in many ways,
of our economic
recovery policy.
NARRATOR:
Inequality of wealth
in the United States
is now higher than in any
other developed country.
American families responded
to these changes in two ways:
By working longer hours
and by going into debt.
As the middle class falls
further and further behind,
there is a political urge
to respond
by making it easier
to get credit.
You don't have to have
a lousy home.
The low-income home buyer
can have just as nice a house
as anybody else.
NARRATOR:
American families borrowed
to finance their homes,
their cars,
their healthcare
and their children's
educations.
People in the bottom
90 percent
lost ground
between 1980 and 2007.
It all went
to the top 1 percent.
NARRATOR:
For the first time
in history,
average Americans
have less education
and are less prosperous
than their parents.
The era of greed
and irresponsibility
on Wall Street
and in Washington
has led us
to a financial crisis
as serious as any
that we've faced
since the Great Depression.
NARRATOR:
When the financial
crisis struck
before the 2008 election,
Barack Obama pointed
to Wall Street greed
and regulatory failures
as examples of the need
for change in America.
A lack of oversight in
Washington and on Wall Street
is exactly what got us
into this mess.
After taking office,
Obama spoke of the need
to reform the industry.
We want a risk regulator,
increased capital
requirements.
We need a consumer financial
protection agency.
We need to change
Wall Street's culture.
But when finally enacted
in mid-2010,
the administration's
financial reforms were weak.
And in some critical areas,
including the rating agencies,
lobbying and compensation,
nothing significant
was even proposed.
Addressing Obama and,
quote, "regulatory reform,"
my response, if it was
one word, would be "ha."
There's very little reform.
INTERVIEWER:
How come?
It's a Wall Street
government.
[APPLAUSE]
NARRATOR:
Obama chose Timothy Geithner
as Treasury secretary.
Geithner was president
of the New York
Federal Reserve
during the crisis,
and a key player in the
decision
to pay Goldman Sachs
100 cents on the dollar
for its bets against
mortgages.
When Tim Geithner
was testifying
to be confirmed
as Treasury secretary
he said,
"I have never
been a regulator."
Now that said to me
he did not understand his job
as president
of the New York Fed.
NARRATOR:
The new president
of the New York Fed
is William C. Dudley,
the former chief economist
of Goldman Sachs,
whose paper with Glenn Hubbard
praised derivatives.
Geithner's chief of staff
is Mark Patterson,
a former lobbyist for Goldman.
And one of the senior advisors
is Lewis Sachs,
who oversaw Tricadia,
a company heavily involved
in betting against the
mortgage securities
it was selling.
To head the Commodity Futures
Trading Commission,
Obama picked Gary Gensler,
a former Goldman Sachs
executive
who had helped ban
the regulation of derivatives.
To run the Securities
and Exchange Commission,
Obama picked Mary Schapiro,
the former CEO of FINRA,
the investment banking
industry's
self-regulation body.
Obama's chief of staff,
Rahm Emanuel,
made $320,000 serving
on the board of Freddie Mac.
Both Martin Feldstein
and Laura Tyson are members
of Obama's Economic Recovery
Advisory Board.
And Obama's chief economic
advisor is Larry Summers.
SPITZER:
The most senior economic
advisors
are the people who were there,
who built the structure.
NARRATOR:
The Obama administration
resisted regulation
of bank compensation
even as foreign leaders
took action.
The financial industry
is a service industry.
It should serve others
before it serves itself.
In September of 2009,
Christine Lagarde
and the finance ministers
of Sweden, the Netherlands,
Luxembourg, Italy,
Spain and Germany
called for the G20 nations,
including the United States,
to impose strict regulations
on bank compensation.
And in July of 2010,
the European Parliament
enacted those
very regulations.
The Obama administration
had no response.
Their view is
it's a temporary blip
and things will go
back to normal.
That is why
I am reappointing him
as chairman of the Federal
Reserve. Thank you, Ben.
NARRATOR:
In 2009, Barack Obama
reappointed Ben Bernanke.
Thank you, Mr. President.
As of mid-2010, not a single
senior financial executive
had been criminally
prosecuted, or even arrested.
No special prosecutor
had been appointed.
Not a single firm had been
prosecuted criminally
for securities fraud
or accounting fraud.
The Obama administration
has made no attempt
to recover
any of the compensation
given to financial executives
during the bubble.
I certainly would think
of criminal action
against some of Countrywide's
top leaders, like Mozilo.
I'd certainly look
at Bear Stearns, Goldman Sachs
and Lehman Brothers
and Merrill Lynch.
INTERVIEWER:
For criminal prosecutions?
Yes. They'd be
very hard to win,
but I think
they could do it
if they got enough underlings
to tell the truth.
NARRATOR:
In an industry
in which drug use,
prostitution and billing of
prostitutes as a
business expense
occur on an industrial scale,
it wouldn't be hard to make
people talk
if you really wanted to.
They gave me a plea bargain
and I took it.
They were not interested
in my records.
INTERVIEWER:
Not interested in
your records?
That's correct.
There's a sensibility
that you don't use
people's personal vices
in the context
of Wall Street cases,
necessarily,
to get them to flip.
I think maybe
it's after the cataclysms
that we've been through,
people will reevaluate.
I'm not the one to pass
judgment on that right now.
CAPUANO:
You come to us today telling
us, "We're sorry, we didn't
mean it.
We won't do it again.
Trust us."
Well, I have some people
in my constituency
that actually robbed
some of your banks.
And they say the same thing.
They're sorry. They didn't
mean it. They won't
do it again.
NARRATOR:
In 2009, as unemployment hit
its highest level in 17 years,
Morgan Stanley paid
its employees over
$14 billion,
and Goldman Sachs paid out
over $16 billion.
In 2010,
bonuses were even higher.
Why should a financial
engineer, uh, be paid
four times to 100 times more
than a real engineer?
A real engineer
build bridges.
A financial engineer
build dreams.
And, you know, when those
dreams turn out to
be nightmares,
other people pay for it.
NARRATOR:
For decades,
the American financial system
was stable and safe.
But then something changed.
The financial industry
turned its back on society,
corrupted our political system
and plunged the world economy
into crisis.
At enormous cost,
we've avoided disaster
and are recovering.
But the men and institutions
that caused the crisis
are still in power,
and that needs to change.
They will tell us
that we need them,
and that what they do
is too complicated
for us to understand.
They will tell us
it won't happen again.
They will spend billions
fighting reform.
It won't be easy.
But some things
are worth fighting for.
[MGMT'S "CONGRATULATIONS"
PLAYING]
Dead in the water
It's not a paid vacation
The sons and daughters
Of city officials
Attend demonstrations
It's hardly
A sink or swim
When all is well
If the ticket sells
Out with a whimper
It's not
A blaze of glory
You look down
From your temple
As people endeavor
To make it a story
And chisel a marble word
But all is lost
If it's never heard
But I've got someone
To make reports
That tell me
How my money's spent
To book my stays
And draw my blinds
So I can't tell
What's really there
And all I need's a great big
Congratulations
I'll keep your dreams
You pay attention for me
As strange as it seems
I'd rather dissolve
Than have you ignore me
The ground
May be moving fast
But I tied my boots
To a broken mast
The difference is clear
You throw it
In your cauldron
Rust and veneer
Dusk and dawn
Steinways and Baldwins
You start with a simple stock
Of all the waste
And salt to taste
But damn my luck
And damn these friends
That keep on combing back
Their smiles
I save my grace
With half-assed guilt